# Automatic Cache Synchronization

[← Back to API Index](../reference.md)

---

## KB Topic: Automatic Cache Synchronization

### Description
_Cache synchronization_ is the mechanism used by SmartClient to ensure that updates made by [dataBoundComponent](../reference.md#interface-databoundcomponent)s or programmatically on [dataSource](../classes/DataSource.md#class-datasource)s directly, are reflected in the client-side caches of other `dataBoundComponent`s. Automatic cache sync means that components update themselves to reflect data changes - so if you update a record in a [form](../classes/DynamicForm.md#class-dynamicform), and the same information is currently visible in a [grid](../classes/ListGrid_1.md#class-listgrid), the grid data will change to reflect the updates automatically.

The SmartClient server is designed to retrieve cache sync data in the most optimal way, taking into account the capabilities of the target data store or data service and the context of the request, such as whether it came from a browser or was programmatically initiated on the server. The cacheSyncStrategy setting can be used to manually control how cache sync is performed server-side, whenever that's necessary.

#### CacheSyncStrategy
Cache sync configuration revolves around the [CacheSyncStrategy](../reference_2.md#type-cachesyncstrategy) type, and to a lesser extent the [CacheSyncTiming](../reference_2.md#type-cachesynctiming). These settings allow you to define a default cache sync approach globally, overridable [per-DataSource](../classes/DataSource.md#attr-datasourcecachesyncstrategy), [per-Operation](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcachesyncstrategy) or [per-request](../classes/DSRequest.md#attr-dsrequestcachesyncstrategy). See the [CacheSyncStrategy documentation](../reference_2.md#type-cachesyncstrategy) for details.

Note that DataSource-level, operation-level and request-level `cacheSyncStrategy` settings are honored in all cases (though see below for a caveat on that), but global settings are defaults only. SmartClient will override the default if it detects that it might lead to problems in a given case.

For example, if a DataSource declares a field that specifies the [autoGenerated](../classes/DataSourceField.md#attr-datasourcefieldautogenerated) flag, it is saying that field is not a sequence but its value is nevertheless generated by the database or ORM platform, so we would not expect a value for that field in the request values. So if the global default `cacheSyncStrategy` is "requestValuesPlusSequences", that is going to lead to SmartClient returning an incomplete cache sync record, which might well look to your users like a broken application.

SmartClient will detect these cases where we would have possibly incomplete cache sync data, and automatically change the strategy to "refetch". This is done when we have a field that is part of the expected outputs (see [DSRequest.outputs](../classes/DSRequest.md#attr-dsrequestoutputs) and [OperationBinding.outputs](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingoutputs)) and specifies any of the following properties (because they all mean that the field's value is server-generated in some way):

*   autoGenerated
*   customSQL
*   customSelectExpression

Similarly, SmartClient will override the global `cacheSyncTiming` setting according to the requirements of a given request. For example, if the global default is "lazy" and there is no DataSource-level, operation-level or request-level timing setting, SmartClient will override the timing to "immediate" for any client-originated request, amongst other things. See the [CacheSyncTiming documentation](../reference_2.md#type-cachesynctiming) for further details.

If you do not want these intelligent fallback behaviors for a given DataSource, operation or request, set a `cacheSyncStrategy` or `cacheSyncTiming` on the DataSource, operation or request. This will always be honored for `cacheSyncStrategy`, even when the system knows that it is going to lead to incomplete cache-sync data. However, even an explicit `cacheSyncTiming` setting at the DataSource, operation or request level will be ignored in certain circumstances, where deferring the cache sync operation could break framework functionality. An example of this is auditing: if your dataSource is configured for [automatic auditing](../classes/DataSource.md#attr-datasourceaudit), the framework categorically _does_ need the cache sync data in order to write an audit record, and when deferred cache sync is in force, we have no guarantee that cache sync will run at all. So we ignore attempts to configure it for deferred cache sync.

#### CacheSyncStrategy support with different DataSource types
Different DataSource types may support only a subset of cacheSyncStrategy options, since some strategies are specific to the capabilities of specific data stores or remote services. The following section describes how `CacheSyncStrategy` applies to various built-in dataSource types
#### SQLDataSource
SQL databases accessed via JDBC do not return the record-as-saved, so extra work is required to retrieve database-generated fields, such as sequences (though sequences are a special case, see below)

With JDBC 3.0+ drivers and a [sequenceMode](../classes/DataSource.md#attr-datasourcesequencemode) of `jdbcDriver`, we can retrieve generated sequence values without requiring an explicit, separate SQL query to retrieve the generated keys. With the default CacheSyncStrategy of `requestValuesPlusSequences`, SQLDataSource uses this JDBC approach to avoid a separate SQL query where possible - see the "requestValuesPlusSequences" section of the [CacheSyncStrategy](../reference_2.md#type-cachesyncstrategy) documentation for details. With a `sequenceMode` of `native`, we will issue a separate SQL query to retrieve the generated keys, even if you are using "requestvaluesPlusSequences". However, it is not a full refetch, it is just a special native query, specific to the database in use, to retrieve just the generated sequence values, so it is still likely to have a performance advantage over using "refetch" - in the refetch case, we perform an _additional_ full fetch, using the retrieved keys as the criteria.

Note that sequences (or identity columns, or auto-increment columns - different databases use different mechanisms and terminology for the same concept) are not the only kind of database-generated value. As well as the three DataSource field settings, mentioned above, that can explicitly denote a generated value - [autoGenerated](../classes/DataSourceField.md#attr-datasourcefieldautogenerated), [customSQL](../classes/DataSourceField.md#attr-datasourcefieldcustomsql) and [customSelectExpression](../classes/DataSourceField.md#attr-datasourcefieldcustomselectexpression) - database-generated values can come from database-declared default values, UDFs and stored procedures, and triggers. In addition, application code can modify data returned from the database in arbitrary ways, via logic in a [DMI](dmiOverview.md#kb-topic-direct-method-invocation), [server script](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingscript) or [custom DataSource implementation](../classes/DataSource.md#attr-datasourceserverconstructor). So there are cases where "refetch" is necessary, and for some applications it may be that most or even all cases require it (if you make extensive use of triggers, or enhance many database responses in Java code, for example).

#### Sequence field object type considerations
SQL databases support different underlying column types for sequence fields. Typically, you use either INTEGER or BIGINT, depending on the maximum number of rows you anticipate for a given table. Unfortunately, the different database products are not always consistent in the way they convert values from the different underlying SQL types into Java objects. For example, MySQL returns values from SQL INTEGER columns as instances of `java.lang.Integer` in ordinary fetch ResultSets, but as instances of `java.lang.Long` from the `getGeneratedKeys()` API.

This is a problem if you have existing Java code that is expecting an instance of `Integer`; if you switch to the more efficient "requestValuesPlusSequences" cacheSyncStrategy, your code will be sent an instance of `Long` instead. Note, this is only a problem for existing server-side Java code; client code is not affected because the SmartClient framework already coerces all integer-type values to type `Long` for serialization to the client.

The SmartClient framework offers a number of configurable mitigations for this problem:

*   We maintain a table of known Java types returned by each database product for "small" sequence columns (32-bit, SQL type INT or INTEGER) and "large" sequence columns (64-bit, SQL type BIGINT). We also maintain a flag per database product indicating whether "small" or "large" sequence columns should be used (as mentioned in the bullet-point below, this applies to integer key fields generally, not just sequences). You can override this flag in your `server.properties` file, per database product or per [dbName](../classes/DataSource.md#attr-datasourcedbname) (the latter is more specific and wins if there is a conflict). For example:
    ```
        # Change all Postgres db connections to use small keys
        sql.postgresql.defaultKeySize: small
        # Change the db with the specific dbName "SalesDB" to use large keys
        sql.SalesDB.defaultKeySize: large
     
    ```
    
*   If you need Java types other than the defaults described above (`java.lang.Integer` for "small" sequences, `java.lang.Long` for "large" sequences), you can declare entries in `server.properties` to override them, per database product or per dbName, like this:
    ```
        # For Postgres, large key values should be returned as instances of BigInteger
        sql.postgresql.javaTypeForLargeKey: java.math.BigInteger
        # and small key values should be returned as instances of Short
        sql.postgresql.javaTypeForSmallKey: java.lang.Short
        # But small key values should be returned as type BigDecimal for AdminDB
        sql.AdminDB.javaTypeForSmallKey: java.math.BigDecimal
     
    ```
    This is useful for new projects that may later switch database vendors, or for projects that use multiple database products in tandem, because it can be used to enforce cross-database type consistency. We would recommend using `java.lang.Integer` and `java.lang.Long` for small and large sequences, respectively, since these cover exactly the same range of valid values as the corresponding SQL types, INTEGER and BIGINT
  
*   The `server.properties` flag `sql.transformGeneratedKeys`, on by default, causes the framework to transform the object returned by the getGeneratedKeys() API in accordance with the above. So, if "SalesDB" and "AdminDB" are both PostgreSQL databases, the settings above would mean:
    *   Adding a record to a DataSource with `dbName="SalesDB"` would return an instance of `java.math.BigInteger` for the sequence field
    *   Adding a record to a DataSource with `dbName="AdminDB"` would return an instance of `java.math.BigDecimal` for the sequence field (because of the custom `javaTypeForSmallSequence` declared for that dbName)
  
*   Note that the above rules are also applied by SmartClient's table-creation logic when you use the [Admin Console](adminConsole.md#kb-topic-admin-console) to import SQL DataSources. Additionally, we use these rules to decide on a column type for any integer field that is marked as [primaryKey](../classes/DataSourceField.md#attr-datasourcefieldprimarykey) or [foreignKey](../classes/DataSourceField.md#attr-datasourcefieldforeignkey), to ensure that the same SQL type is used at both ends of the relation (because some databases require this)
  
*   If `sql.transformGeneratedKeys` is explicitly set false, no transformation takes place; your code is directly returned whatever object type the JDBC dirver returned
  
*   If you have an existing project where a mix of large and small sequence types is already in place, the above approaches to provide consistency will not help. In this case, the `server.properties` flag "sql.transformGeneratedKeysToFetchType" should be considered. This flag is off by default; when switched on, it causes the framework to cast the generated value of a sequence field, as returned by the JDBC driver or native query, to the same Java type that a regular fetch of that field would have returned. This is accomplished by running a basic fetch of a single row the first time the information is required, determining the underlying SQL type from the ResultSetMetadata, and then caching that information for future use. The performance impact of this is minor, since it involves a single additional fetch per DataSource instance for the lifetime of the JVM. Note, this flag has no effect if `sql.transformGeneratedKeys` is false
  
*   `sql.transformGeneratedKeysToFetchType` is only intended for existing projects that have a lot of server-side code that interacts with the SmartClient Server and may be affected by cacheSyncStrategy "requestValuesPlusSequences" returning a different Java object type for sequence fields than your existing code is expecting. For any new project we would recommend using the other options outlined above to either match your database's return type for fetches, or to force consistency to types you specify
  
*   Finally, the Java type to use for a specific field can be set using the field's [javaClass](../classes/DataSourceField.md#attr-datasourcefieldjavaclass) property. Alternatively, SmartClient will automatically coerce values to match declared types if you are using Javabeans rather than Maps as your data model - see [beanClassName](../classes/DataSource.md#attr-datasourcebeanclassname). Both of these approaches take precedence over the mechanisms described above

#### HibernateDataSource and JPADataSource
[HibernateDataSource](hibernateIntegration.md#kb-topic-integration-with-hibernate) and [JPADataSource](jpaIntegration.md#kb-topic-integration-with-jpa) only support `refetch`. These two implementations integrate with the underlying ORM system at the level of the ORM's API, allowing it to handle the details of database interaction. With these two DataSource types, we are simply working with "persistent objects" - how the ORM manages things like changes made by the database during update queries, or sequence values in add operations, is the ORM's business.

For this reason, `HibernateDataSource` and `JPADataSource` install a special `CacheSyncStrategy` implementation under the `refetch` name, that just does nothing, leaving the response data returned by the update operation unchanged.

#### Custom/Generic DataSources
In addition to the built-in DataSource types listed above, you can of course write your own [custom dataSource](writeCustomDataSource.md#kb-topic-custom-server-datasources) implementations. These custom DataSources will participate in cache sync like any other:

*   You can specify a `cacheSyncStrategy` on the [DataSource](../classes/DataSource.md#class-datasource), [operationBinding](../classes/OperationBinding.md#class-operationbinding) or [dsRequest](../reference.md#object-dsrequest)
*   The default strategy for a custom dataSource is "`responseValues`", because that was the prevailing behavior for custom DataSources before `cacheSyncStrategy` was introduced
*   If you want to use "`refetch`" (ie, you override the default in your `server.properties`, or set the strategy explicitly on your DataSource or operation binding), you must implement a fetch operation, and if your dataSource has fields of type "sequence", your fetch mechanism must be able to resolve the values of such fields

Note that "`refetch`" with a custom dataSource is done lazily, and it is not done at all if nothing asks for the response data. This is because the integration with cache sync happens when the server-side `DSResponse`'s `getData()` method is called. This happens automatically and will work perfectly for most use cases. If, however, you have some unusual requirement which means you need "`refetch`" to cause an immediate cache sync fetch like it does with the built-in dataSources, you can do what they do: invoke the `CacheSyncStrategy` manually from your execution flow, like this:
```
    CacheSyncStrategy strategy = dsRequest.getCacheSyncStrategy();
    if (strategy.shouldRunCacheSync(dsRequest)) {
        // Apply the cache sync data to the dsResponse, first fetching it if necessary
        strategy.applyCacheSyncStrategy(dsRequest, dsResponse)
    }
 
```
#### `canSyncCache`, `cacheSyncOperation` and `useForCacheSync`
These three long-standing [operationBinding](../classes/OperationBinding.md#class-operationbinding) flags interact with the above-documented behavior of `CacheSyncStrategy` as follows:

*   If [canSyncCache](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcansynccache) is false, no cache sync logic will run at all
*   If a [useForCacheSync](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindinguseforcachesync) operation is in force, or the update operation specifies a [cacheSyncOperation](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcachesyncoperation), that operation will be run if we are refetching the updated record - ie, if the `cacheSyncStrategy` is `refetch`. Depending on the [cacheSyncTiming](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcachesynctiming) in force, the operation execution may be deferred, and may not run at all. If we are not refetching the updated record, these two flags have no effect

#### Adding multiple records
By default, cache sync is switched off for multi-insert requests (ie, add requests with more than one valueSet; cache sync is always off for [allowMultiUpdate](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingallowmultiupdate) operations, unless you explicitly specify a `cacheSyncStrategy` on the request or operationBinding). You can change this default behavior for multi-inserts by changing `server.properties` flag "`default.multi.update.cache.sync.strategy`" to "`sync`""; this will cause the system to use the same cacheSyncStrategy it would use for a regular single-record request on that DataSource. Note that in this case, the default strategy can be auto-overridden by the framework just like a normal single-update strategy.

You can also just set a specific `cacheSyncStrategy` on the DataSource, operation or DSRequest, just like with a regular single-record request, and again, these specific settings are not auto-overridden except in cases where they could potentially cause feature breakage, as described above.

### Related

- [DSResponse.invalidateCache](../classes/DSResponse.md#attr-dsresponseinvalidatecache)
- [OperationBinding.useForCacheSync](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindinguseforcachesync)
- [OperationBinding.cacheSyncOperation](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcachesyncoperation)
- [OperationBinding.canSyncCache](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcansynccache)
- [DataSource.cacheSyncStrategy](../classes/DataSource.md#attr-datasourcecachesyncstrategy)
- [OperationBinding.cacheSyncStrategy](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcachesyncstrategy)
- [DSRequest.cacheSyncStrategy](../classes/DSRequest.md#attr-dsrequestcachesyncstrategy)
- [DataSource.cacheSyncTiming](../classes/DataSource.md#attr-datasourcecachesynctiming)
- [OperationBinding.cacheSyncTiming](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcachesynctiming)
- [DSRequest.cacheSyncTiming](../classes/DSRequest.md#attr-dsrequestcachesynctiming)

### See Also

- [CacheSyncStrategy](../reference_2.md#type-cachesyncstrategy)
- [OperationBinding.canSyncCache](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcansynccache)
- [OperationBinding.useForCacheSync](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindinguseforcachesync)
- [OperationBinding.cacheSyncOperation](../classes/OperationBinding.md#attr-operationbindingcachesyncoperation)

---
